Title: Visualizing the speed of solar winds
Authors: Il-Hyun Cho, Yong-Jae Moon

Attached movie caption: A monthly averaged movie of two-dimension solar wind speeds from 1999 to 2010. The blue and red colors indicates low and high speeds, respectively.

General Introduction
 The solar wind is a continuous flow of electrons, (heavy) ions emanated from entire latitudes of the Sun, whose journey in the interplanetary space is affected by the magnetic fields. Its speed ranges up to approximately 800 km/s, which disturbs the magnetosphere of the Earth and planets when it passes through. The origin of this mass flows is expected to be an expansion of coronal plasma due to million degree of hot solar corona.
 A modeling of the solar winds requires a comparison with observational data. Previous measurements may be summarized by three basis: (1) in-situ particle detectors on board the Planet Explorers such as Helios, Mariner, Pioneer, Voyager spacecrafts, (2) interpretation of the scintillation of amplitude and phase of radio signals of pulsars modulated by flowing materials in the interplanetary space when it passes through, (3) height-time changes of coronal mass ejections and streamer blobs dragged by the ambient solar winds.

INTRODUCTION TO STUDY
 A space based Coronagraph such as SOHO/LASCO, a telescope hiding the solar disk and thus enabling eclipse-like observations, have been detecting the scattered light by coronal electrons near the Sun. It provides continuous and homogeneous data sets of white light images of the corona over twenty years. The image includes various dynamic features such as coronal mass ejections and streamer blobs as well as quasi-static features such as coronal streamers and faint plumes. Recently, two-dimensional solar wind speeds have been drawn by using delayed correlations between two coronagraphic images at different times for a pole region of the corona. On the other hand, daily maps of solar wind speeds for one-month period are established by incorporating both polarized brightness and ultraviolet images of solar corona. These two-dimensional measurements including methods mentioned in the above paragraph, together with theoretical models provide important hints how and where the solar wind accelerates, and how it evolves with time.

METHODOLOGY
 However, the measurements does not cover wide ranges of time and space with tight samplings, which are essential for a successful modeling. Any flow of local intensity disturbance whether it is dynamic or quasi-static appears as an enhanced power in the Fourier phase speed domain. If one takes an inverse Fourier transform rather than using the Fourier powers directly, the movie can be decomposed into a series of movies as a function of speed.

RESULTS
 The decomposition by using the Fourier filtering gives a speed histogram as a function of time and space, which readily provides a movie of speed map by taking the first statistical moment of the histogram. Thanks to the continuous and uniform observations by the SOHO satellite, daily maps of solar wind speeds are constructed. Form these, 1-week, 1-month, and 1-year maps of speeds are obtained, that provides tables of the speeds as a function of position and time, based on the direct observation without any physical assumption.

CONCLUSIONS
 Now, it becomes possible to draw a 2D map of solar wind speeds from a series of coronapraphic white light images as shown in the movie. From the maps, it is found that the latitudinal structure of solar wind speeds is uniform in the periods of solar cycle maximum, while it is bimodal in the periods of solar cycle minimum: fast speed in poles and slow speed at the equator, as expected by the previous observations by the Voyager spacecraft and interplanetary radio scintillations. The measured radial speeds resembles the Parker’s solar wind solution exhibiting the rapid increase in the low altitude and converging an asymptotic speed at high altitude.

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
 The speeds are measured from the direct observation, confirms and validates the previous findings. It may be immediately compared with solar wind models. In addition, the propagation of a coronal mass ejection that sometimes severely disturbs the Earth’s atmosphere, is generally affected by both the kinematic properties of the ejection itself as well as an ambient solar wind. Thus a more accurate prediction on the arrival time of ejections would be enabled by using the ambient solar wind speed.
